# Introduction

In the 1970s believed that people are generally rational, with strong
emotions being the cause departure from rationality. Since then
behavioral psychologists and economists have developed a different view
based on an analysis of how we think. TFS describes two systems of
thought that synthesizes this understanding of the mind's dual
operations: System 1 and System 2. These two Systems play the role of
distinct characters in the book, with unique personality attributes who
both cooperate yet compete for control of our attention and behavior.

To isolate the behavior of System 1, consider the picture

![](https://www.tamarindocomms.com/sites/default/files/inline-images/snimok_ekrana_2014-08-01_v_10.05.11_1406873132.png}

In fairly effortless manner, we are able to surmise several facts about
this woman: she is angry and quite likely to say unkind words in a loud
and harsh voice. This assessment came to mind instantaneously without
effort, and is an example of fast thinking.

On the other hand, consider the question

17 X 24 =

We can immediately identify this as a multiplication problem, and are
aware there exists a paper and pencil solution. We can recognize that
12,000 is too big and 123 is too small to be the answer. However,
without further thought it is unlikely that we can surmise the correct
solution was not 568. In order to carry out the analysis a different
mode of thinking needs to ensue -- slow thinking. You will retrieve from
memory a cognitive program learned in school for carrying out
multiplication. You effortfully need to carry out a sequence of steps,
retaining numbers in working memory to hold onto intermediate results
which feels like a temporary strain. The overall process of mental work
is deliberate, effortful, and orderly, a prototype of slow thinking. The
effects of slow thinking were not only felt in the mind -- it had
physical impact on you -- your muscles would have tensed, blood pressure
rose, heart rate increased, and pupils dilated, which all would have
relaxed upon when you found the right answer.

# System 1 and System 2

Other examples of System 1 and System 2 in action include:

Table 1

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **System 2**                     | **System 1**                     |
+==================================+==================================+
| > Brace for the starter gun in a | > Detect one object is more      |
| > race                           | > distant than another           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Focus attention on the clowns  | > Orient the source of a sudden  |
| > in a circus                    | > sound                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Look for a woman with white    | > Complete the phrase "bread and |
| > hair                           | > ..."                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Search memory to identify a    | > Make a "disgust face" when     |
| > surprising sound               | > shown a horrible picture       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Maintain a faster walking      | > Detect hostility in a voice    |
| > speed than is natural for you  |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Monitor the appropriateness of | > Answer to 2 + 2 =?             |
| > your behavior in a social      |                                  |
| > situation                      |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Count the occurrences of the   | > Read words on large billboards |
| > letter *a* in a page of text   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Tell someone your phone number | > Drive a car on an empty road   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Park in a narrow space (for    | > Find a strong move in chess    |
| > most people)                   | > (if you are a chess master)    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Compare two washing machines   | > Understand simple sentences    |
| > for overall value              |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Fill out a tax form            | > Recognize that a "meek and     |
|                                  | > tidy soul with a passion for   |
|                                  | > detail" resembles an           |
|                                  | > occupational stereotype.       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| > Check the validity of a        |                                  |
| > complex logical argument       |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

As TFS describes it

-   "*System* 1 operates automatically and quickly, with little or no
    effort or sense of voluntary control"

-   *"System* 2 allocates attention to the effortful mental activities
    that demand it, including complex computations. The operations of
    System 2 are often associated with the subjective experience of
    agency, choice, and concentration".

The key theme of the book is that whereas our self-identities (and the
ideal aspects of Homo Economicus) are bound in the version of our System
2 selves, System 1 in fact drives the lion's share of our everyday
thoughts and actions. A key focus of the book then is to investigate the
specific tendencies of System 1 to reach judgments and make choices
which are fast, often intelligent, but exhibit systematic biases. The
other question the book considers are the capabilities of System 2 that
are directed towards control and the correction of the automatic
processes of System 1.

The key distinguishing characteristics between System 1 and System 2 can
be describe more fully as follows.

  -------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------
  System 1 (Intuitive)                   System 2 (Reflective)

  **[Process Characteristics]{.ul}**\    **[Process Characteristics]{.ul}**\
  Automatic\                             Controlled\
  Effortless\                            Effortful\
  Associative\                           Deductive (formal rules of reasoning)\
  Rapid, parallel\                       Slow, serial\
  Skilled action                         Rule application

  **[Content Characteristics]{.ul}**\    **[Content Characteristics]{.ul}**\
  Affective (emotional)\                 Neutral\
  Causal propensities (relationships)\   Statistics\
  Concrete, specific\                    Abstract\
  Prototypes                             Sets
  -------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------

**Heuristic Reasoning Homo Economicus**

## The Stroop Task

A useful way to recognize the simultaneous joint existence of these two
systems of thinking, consider the "Stroop Task":

**Direction:** State the *color* in which each word is printed.

![Stroop Task](https://www.simplypsychology.org/stroop-effect.jpg)

The "Stroop effect" is that Set 3 is much slower than Set 1 or Set 2 to
complete. Why is Set 3 harder than Set 1 or Set 2? We can understand the
effect through the joint operations of System 1 and System 2.

An explanation of the Stroop Effect based on the above schematic is as
follows. Reading is a highly practiced, automatic skill. System 1 thus
accesses the word meaning (concept of red\
or concept of blue) quickly and automatically. This process is
involuntary and cannot easily be suppressed or inhibited. The task
instruction itself (in the directions) requires following a rule: "Name
the font color ". The System 2 rule processing is slower than the
automatic reading process of System 1. There is a response conflict
between saying \"blue\" when looking at a blue \"red\". Also, there
conflict between saying \"red\" when looking at a red \"blue\". The
response conflict in turn causes slower response.

Stroop effect exemplifies two concurrent processes of thinking:

1.  Automatic process extracting the meaning of "blue"

2.  Controlled process identifying the color of "blue"

Reading the word meaning cannot be voluntarily inhibited and a
difficulty occurs when an automatic process (extracting the meaning of a
color word) conflicts with a rule-governed process (naming the color). A
key idea is that the automatic and controlled processes can both occur
at the same time, and sometimes they come into conflict. Herein will lie
a key source of tension that cause human departures from Homo
Economicus: Heuristic reasoning conflicts with rule-based reasoning and
can sometimes dominates.

## Gorilla Experiment

Another phenomenon that reveals is the tension between System 1 and
System 2 is this famous experiment by Chabris and
Simmons. 



The experiment shows that both System 1 and System 2 compete
for the finite attentional resources of the mind. These attentional
resources can be associated with the "working memory" module in the
schematic model of cognitive resources below (taken from Hastie and
Dawes, 2010). For System 2 to perform, it has to assume resources of
working memory (through its executive function and control), threby
limiting the capacities available for System 1.

![](myMediaFolder/media/image2.emf){width="2.89in" height="1.78in"}

# Interaction between System 1 and System 2. 

How are System 1 and System 2 linked? TFS explains the connection rather
astutely (p. 24):

> In the story I will tell, System 1 and 2 are both active whenever we
> are awake,. System 1 runs automatically and System 2 is normally in a
> comfortable low effort mode, in which only a fraction of its capacity
> is engaged. System 1 continuously generates suggestions for System 2:
> impressions, intuitions, intentions, and feelings. If endorsed by
> System 2, impressions and intuitions turn into beliefs, and implulses
> turn into voluntary actions. When all goes smoothly, which is most of
> the time, System 2 adopts the suggestions of System 1 with little or
> no modification.... When System 1 runs into difficulty, it calls on
> System 2 to support more detailed and specific processing that may
> solve the problem of the moment.

Examples of problems that activate System 2's involvement include all
those listed on Table 1, which can range from solving a math problem,
exhibiting self-control in specific social situations, heightened
awareness/concentration when driving at night, or when an anomaly/risk
presents itself suggesting an error is about to be made (among others).
The common pattern is that some friction in System 1's usual function is
an invitation of System 2 to act.

There is one massive problem -- System 2 is lazy! Given the choice, it
errs on the side generally (although with considerable individual
heterogeneity) towards inaction, e.g., it abides by the "law of least
effort". To appreciate this tendency towards a lazy state, refer back to
the cognitive schematic -- the control of the attention and working
memory by System 2 for deliberative thinking requires effort and work.
Thus both self-control and cognitive effort are forms of mental work.
This leads to a phenomenon of ego-depletion: "activities that impose
high demands on System 2 require self-control, and the exertion of
self-control is depleting and unpleasant." Difficult System 2 work,
whether cognitive reasoning or self-control, in-fact consumes blood
glucose.

In a remarkable study published in the [Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences](https://www.pnas.org/content/108/17/6889) on
Israeli judges shows some perverse consequences of ego-depletion. In
this legal setting, there are parole judges reviewing applications for
parole, and each application is considered for 6 minutes each. The
default decision is a denial (so they are deliberating to overturn a
denial). On average 35% approved, however 65% approved immediately after
a meal which dwindles to nearly 0% before next meal. The pattern is
depicted in the findings from the paper below.

![](myMediaFolder/media/image3.jpg){width="2.66in" height="1.6in"}

There is considerable individual heterogeneity in the natural tendency
of System 2 to exert effort for executive control over System 1.
Consider one of the more famous experiments in the history of
psychology: the Walter Mischel cookie/marshmallow
[experiment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BLtQaRrDsC4).

This suggests there are at least two different dimensions of System 2
discussed by Stanovich and West in their book *Rationality and the
Reflective Mind.* One is intelligence -- the sheer ability to excel in
slow thinking and computation. The other is rationality, which is
challenged by the degree to which System 2 wants to be lazy, which also
varies at the individual level and features of what the authors call the
reflective mind.

The effort expended by System 2 in relation to the effortless automation
of System 1 provides some understanding as to why human cognition
evolved this way? As TFS explains (p. 25)

> The division of labor between System 1 and System 2 is highly
> efficient: it minimizes effort and optimizes performance. The
> arrangement works well most of the time because System 1 is generally
> very good at what it does: Its models of familiar situations are
> accurate, its short-term predictions are usually accurate as well, and
> its initial reactions to challenges are swift and generally
> appropriate. System 1 has biases, however, systematic errors that it
> is prone to make in specified circumstances. One further limitation of
> System 1 is that it cannot be turned off.

The interaction can be described graphically as followed



